---
title: On Bicycle Racing
subtitle: Just some thoughts
date: '2016-03-12'
slug: bike-racing-thoughts
---

# Why race bikes?

So last spring/summer I started road racing with the UBC Cycling team, taking
part of the collegiate racing in the Northwest conference. Collegiate racing
was a great introduction into the world of biking racing for me, being
alongside people of similar mindsets. Everybody is just a student who likes to
ride bikes, and in that sense they probably don't take themselves too
seriously as bike racers. And of course, why should we? Bike racing is just
another avenue we happen to go down and explore while enjoying the hobby of
cycling.

Cycling itself is a form of expression, a way to extend your body to perform
in extraordinary ways. The reason why I got into bike racing was because I'm
the type of person who always wants (or needs?) that competitiveness to keep
pushing myself to do better. So the collegiate season was like a way to make
friends from different US schools, and get a taste of this competitiveness.

After finishing the collegiate season, coming into form late into the season I
continued to race at local events. The weekly criterium series were in full
effect and it was easy to go roll out and race together, then ride home
together. In essence, the racing itself was fast and painful, but it was the
endorphine fueled group ride after the race that was even more enjoyable.
Coming down from an intense effort, everybody groups up and heads home,
chatting about their love of bicycles, and life. This is the good life.

But every racer encounters a moment when they ask themselves why do it at all?
For me, and maybe for many others as well, this happens after (or during?) a
crash. As it happens in all fast pace events with humans, mistakes happen and
this leads to crashes. Crashes vary in intensity, some just a light tumble,
others have you violently being attached to the ground. Just a light touch of
wheels as you're sprinting at 50km/h, and in a split second you know pain is
coming next. Appendages flail in the air, your face contorts into what is
probably a funny picture, and you hit the ground.

You get up, dazed, checking over yourself, hoping that it's not as bad as it
was last time. Phew, no broken bones, it could always be worse right? You
recall the rider you saw lying in the ditch as you did your race laps around
the circuit, holding his shoulder in pain. As the adrenaline subsides, the
pain slowly creeps in, the bruises on your shoulder, and leg. And then you
wonder why you keep doing this, why you continue to risk your body race after
race.

## Pain and suffer

So I originally started writing this article after I crashed out at one of my
races. But now it's almost 4 weeks later, and between that time I can say it
has probably been one of the most difficult, or trying times of my racing
career. After crashing, I wrote everything above to express my thoughts on
racing, and then I proceeded to race again to because honestly I enjoyed the
thrill of it, the fact that you're pushing your body to it's limits of
performance.

Recently at one of my races I was attending, I was sitting in the parking lot
waiting for my races as other groups went out earlier. I heard on the radio
that there was a crash, but as a racer, you know that crashes happen and I
thought nothing of it. Then as the radio calls proceeded to sound, it sounded
like the crash was more severe than just a roadside spill and road rash. Then
the ambulance sirens were heard, and word of helicopter airlifting was talked
about. As time ticked by, our races were delayed and then we were kept in the
dark about any sort of details. We sat around, racers sitting around trying to
comprend the situation, dealing with it however we could.

We didn't know whether or not the races would continue, and what to expect. I
sat around once again, thinking about why I race. We went out for a short spin
to clear our minds, and got word that races would continue so we headed back.
When we went back, we learned that the crashed rider has passed away.

How fucked up is that? What do you even do in such a situation? This just
brings me back to the question of why we do it at all. Is it worth it for the
thrill, the adrenaline of pushing your body to it's limits, the discover of
the abilities your body can do on the limit?
